We always hear that React's `setState` is asynchronous, and I've been convinced of this until I read the source code of React.

Today, I want to tell you that `setState` is absolutely synchronous, no asynchronous except you open the `Concurrent Mode` of React, but it's still unstable now, so what I talking about is based on `Sync Mode` of React.

I divide `setState` into 2 parts, triggered by React event and the others. A little confused? It doesn't matter, keep up with me and then you will understand.

*Hint: This is my first article written in English, there maybe some mistakes of grammar, please forgive me.*

### SyntheticEvent

At the beginging, I want to explain the concept of `SyntheticEvent` in React. It owes to `SyntheticEvent` that we can merge updates and render them only once, we also call it as batch updates. If you aren't familiar with `SyntheticEvent`, [here](https://reactjs.org/docs/events.html) is the reference.

### Update Processes

However, what's the connection between `setState` and `SyntheticEvent`? here we have a example:

```js
import React from 'react';

export default class App extends React.Component {
  constructor(props) {
    super(props);

    this.state = {
      clickCount: 0
    };
  }

  handleClickCount = () => {
    this.setState(state => ({
      clickCount: state.clickCount + 1
    }));
    console.log('# state.clickCount', this.state.clickCount);
  }

  render () {
    console.log('# render start');

    return (
      <div>
        <p>{this.state.clickCount}</p>
        <button onClick={this.handleClickCount}>Increment</button>
      </div>
    );
  }
}
```

When button is clicked, console will show these infomation:

```
# state.clickCount 0
# render start
```

`setState` was already executed, but the state wasn't updated, Why?

I guess many developers are familiar with this example, and the conclusion of React's setState is asynchronous is also based on this.
It seems to be asynchronous, but it's actually synchronous, let me show you the real secret about `setState`.

When we click button, the first executed function isn't `handleClickCount` but the `TopLevelEvent` which was captured by `document`, then it marks `isBatchingUpdates` which is one of global variable in React as true [# code line](https://github.com/facebook/react/blob/master/packages/react-reconciler/src/ReactFiberScheduler.js#L2440), `fn` which contains events will be executed, and `performSyncWork` will start `render phase`.

Let's refer to processes of `setState`, when it encounters `requestWork` [#code line](https://github.com/facebook/react/blob/master/packages/react-reconciler/src/ReactFiberScheduler.js#L2042), if `isBatchingUpdates` is true, it will be returned before `perfomSyncWork`. That's why `setState` is synchronous but `state` wasn't updated immediately.

I simplified the whole processes as following:

```js
let isBatchingUpdates = false;

function setState() {
  if (isBatchingUpdates) {
    return;
  }

  performSyncWork();
}

function dispatEvent(e) {
  isBatchingUpdates = true;

  fn(); // execute React events based on e.target

  isBatchingUpdates = false;
  if (!isBatchingUpdates) {
    performSyncWork(); // start render phase
  }
}

document.addEventListener('click', dispatEvent, false);
```

As we can see above, there's not any asynchronous code. In the event listener, it haven't executes `performSyncWork` so `state` is still old.

The order of execution:

* trigger document event
* set `isBatchingUpdates` as true
* execute synthetic event
* execute `setState`
* returned before `performSyncWork`(because `isBatchingUpdates` is true)
* log the old state
* execute `performSyncWork` in `dispatchEvent`

From what I just said, we can draw a conclusion: React's `setState` is synchronous, but the order of execution is different between `SyntheticEvent` and the others.

### Examples

Note that we know the principle of `setState`, let's make a little change of the example.

I added some code following:

```js
...
handleClickCountLater = () => {
  setTimeout(this.handleClickCount, 0);
}
...
// render
...
<button onClick={this.handleClickCountLater}>Increment Later</button>
...
```

You can guess what will happen before I show you the answer.

The console will show following infomation when you click this button:

```
# render start
# state.clickCount 1
```

In the document listener, it pushes `setTimeout` to `WebAPIs`. In next event loop, `setState` will be executed, but `isBatchingUpdates` is false at this time, so it continues to execute `performSyncWork`. The result is the same if you replace `setTimeout` with `Promise.resolve`.

let's add a native event to button element.

```js
// constructor
...
this.btnRef = React.createRef();
...

componentDidMount() {
  this.btnRef.current.addEventListener('click', this.handleClickCount, false);
}

// render
...
<button ref={this.btnRef}>Increment Ref</button>
...
```

Due to btnRef's event isn't controlled by `SyntheticEvent`, we will get these infomation at console:

```
# state.clickCount 1
# render start
```

### Conclusion

All in all, `setState` is synchronous, but the order of execution is different between `SyntheticEvent` and the others. In the SyntheticEvent, React will collect all the updates and then update them once, which we call batch updates.

If you want to update state based on the old state, I strongly recommend `Functional setState`, because it will help you avoid some bugs. To learn more about `Functional setState`, [here](https://medium.freecodecamp.org/functional-setstate-is-the-future-of-react-374f30401b6b) is an article maybe help you.
